---
layout: project
title: Flash-drive holder
description: Creative CAD and 3D Printing project
technologies: [Fusion 360, 3D printing]
image: /assets/images/flashdrive-cover.jpg
---

In the summer of 2021, I looked at my desk and saw flash drives and micro SD cards pushed into a disorganized pile. I needed a solution, as that pile would only grow due to my new 3D printer that I had just spent my first paycheck on. I had been wanting to use my 3D printer to make something useful, and I thought this could be the perfect opportunity. Just like that, the design process had started.

The first thing to understand is that storage devices like USB drives, SD cards, and micro SD cards are inserted into computers and hubs, so they can easily and efficiently be stored if they are inserted next to each other. Typically, they are inserted horizontally, but horizontal space is a limited resource on my desk, so the ideal orientation would be for them to be stored vertically. I also knew I wanted a section in this holder for USB flash drives, SD cards, and micro SD cards, as those are the main storage devices I work with and had lying around.

Now that the initial ideation had happened, I took to Fusion 360 and, as most creations start, I made a sketch of a rectangle. The dimensions I chose were a little arbitrary, but I felt like it was small enough to be effective at consolidating my scattered drives while still being substantial enough to be noticed. I then partitioned the rectangle into three sections where the flash drive section would equate to half the area and the SD card and micro SD card sections would take up a quarter of the area each. The rationale behind this decision was pretty simple: I have more flash drives than I have of the other two, and they take up more space.

I extruded each section to my desired height with the flash drives being the highest tier, then SD cards, then micro SD cards. Using my trusty ruler, I measured the dimensions of the parts of the drives that I wanted to be held by the holder, and I made rectangular sketches of those dimensions. For the USB drives, I used a rectangular pattern along with some math to make sure they were equally spaced from each other and the edges of the holder. I also had to make sure there was enough space between the holes to account for bulkier flash drives. I then extruded into the solid using the cut functionality. I did a very similar process for the SD cards and micro SD cards but arranged them more manually to maximize the space while also being visually interesting.

This was version 1, and it was ready to print, so I exported to Cura and then printed it. As expected, there were some critical flaws that needed to be remedied. For starters, only the micro SD cards fit in their slots, as I forgot to account for tolerance for the USB drives and the SD cards. I also didn’t like how sharp the edges of the rectangle were, so I used a fillet operation on them. After a few more versions, I also thought to fillet the openings of the holes to make it easier to store the drives and make them less likely to damage a drive. All in all, I iterated and printed about five different versions before I got to a satisfactory place where it performed the exact function I had set out for it to do. For now, I was done and happy with my work, as I no longer had a flash drive organizational problem.

\[Note 2025\]: I have made another version that emphasizes micro SD cards over the other two, as it is to be used by a Cornell project team that engages with 3D printing a lot and therefore has many micro SD cards.