---
layout: project
title: Mail Room Inefficiencies
description: Advanced research for Cornell's Operations Research department
technologies: [Python, Excel, Queuing Theory, Simulation, Databases]
image: /assets/images/mail-room-cover-photo.jpg
---

In the spring semester of 2024, I participated in research for the Operations Research and Information Engineering department at Cornell University, where I helped analyze inefficiencies in the North Campus Mail Room. I worked in a team of three, which met for several hours multiple times per week to conduct a thorough analysis. We also gave weekly presentations of our progress and findings to our supervising professor.

To begin, we were given data on the operations of the mail room, including package pickup rates, package arrival rates, speed of service, queue length, organizational system, and more. We then imported the data into Python using pandas and created some preliminary graphs to get a feel for the data and try to uncover apparent visual patterns. From these graphs, we found that the queue was well modeled by a Poisson distribution, which is a fundamental tool in queuing theory; the rate at which a student is likely to pick up their packages decays exponentially per day; and the package arrival rate is cyclical based on the time of year (move-in, Christmas, etc.). These early findings were not very surprising but were extremely helpful when we created simulations.

Our main goal for this analysis was to see how altering the mail room's organizational system would affect average service time, as service time was a major problem that students were experiencing when picking up their packages. At the time of our project, mail was sorted into bins by the first letter of students' last names, with extra bins added based on demand. We observed that when a student requested their package, the mail center employee would go to the bin corresponding to the first letter of the student's last name and perform a linear search through the packages until the desired one was found. Our team hypothesized that an alteration to the organizational system would be more cost- and time-effective than changes to any other area of the system (e.g., retraining the staff).

Using our knowledge of the system, we created a Python program that took in historical data and used the observed distributions to recreate, via simulation, the current process. We did this for two main reasons: first, to create a control group to compare future findings against; and second, to make sure our simulation model accurately reflected the real world to a satisfactory degree. We implemented a single-vendor queuing model as the basis for our simulation.

Now that we had data for our control group, it was time to run experiments on different organizational systems. Our main hypothesis was: If packages are more evenly distributed across bins, then service time will decrease. Therefore, our new organizational system implemented a hash function that made use of chaining (up to 300 items per bin) and linear probing for overflow—much like the current system. We ran the experiment many times with varying numbers of bins. Obviously, as the number of bins increased, the time to find a given package within a bin decreased. To keep the comparison fair and avoid increasing cost, we chose to report the results from the version using 26 bins.

We found that the experiment went extremely well, and many of our hypotheses proved true. The time to find a package within a bin decreased dramatically, while all other measured variables that were supposed to stay constant did (within margin of error due to noise). Overall, we concluded that reorganizing the mail room to implement our hash function could increase efficiency by up to 30% without increasing the cost of operations. For more details on our project, please read our [final report]({{ "/assets/Final_Report.pdf" | relative_url }}).